Schools admissions
Contents
Choosing schools
Admission criteria
School starting age
Applying
School waiting lists
Appealing a school's decision
Complain about the appeals process
Choosing schools
Contact your local council to find:

schools in your area
admission criteria for the schools you’re interested in
You can also contact your local council to apply for places in schools in other areas.

Find out about a school
You can find out more by:

visiting the school - most schools have open days
reading the school’s most recent Ofsted reports
checking school league tables, which include exam results
talking to other parents about what they think of the school
What schools must publish on their website
Schools’ websites must include:

the amount of money they get from taking underprivileged children (the ‘pupil premium’), what they do with it and the effect it’s had
details of the curriculum
admission criteria
behaviour policy
special educational needs policy
disability policy
links to Ofsted reports
links to performance data
the school’s latest key stage 2 and 4 attainment and progress measures
You can also get advice about choosing schools from your local council. All councils have teams to help parents get their children into schools.


Admission criteria
All schools have admission criteria to decide which children get places. The school or local council usually set these.

Admission criteria are different for each school. For example, schools may give priority to children:

who have a brother or sister at the school already
who live close to the school
from a particular religion (for faith schools)
who do well in an entrance exam (for selective schools, for example grammar schools or stage schools)
who went to a particular primary school (a ‘feeder school’)
in care or being looked after (all schools must have this as a top priority)
who are eligible for the pupil premium
Your local council can give you a booklet about schools’ criteria and how to apply.

Children with special educational needs (SEN)
If your child has SEN their statement or education, health and care plan will recommend a school for them. If you apply there, the school must give your child a place.

Complain about unfair criteria
Contact the Schools Adjudicator if you think a school has unlawful admission criteria.

You must do this by 15 May.

School starting age
Most children start school full-time the September after they turn 4.

If you do not think your child is ready to start school by then, they can start part-way through the year or part time - as long as they are in full-time education by the time they reach ‘compulsory school age’.

Children born in the summer
Children born between 1 April and 31 August can start the September after they turn 5.

Contact the local council or school to ask for your child to start later. They’ll decide if your child should start in reception year or year 1.

Compulsory school age
Your child must start full-time education once they reach compulsory school age. This is on 31 December, 31 March or 31 August following their fifth birthday - whichever comes first. If your child’s fifth birthday is on one of those dates then they reach compulsory school age on that date.

For example, if your child reaches compulsory school age on 31 March, they must start full-time education the term after (summer term that year).

Children must stay in full-time education until they reach school leaving age.

All 3 to 4-year-olds in England are entitled to free early education before they start school full time.

School waiting lists
If your child has not got a place, contact your local council for schools with places.

You can also put your child’s name down on a waiting list. The ‘admission authority’ for the school (usually the school itself or the council) must keep a waiting list open for the first term of each admission year.

Contact the school or your local authority if you want your child’s name added to a waiting list.

If your child is on a waiting list and the school offers you a place, the admission authority will send you a formal offer. You can still accept the offer even if your child has already started at another school.

Appealing a school's decision
You’ll be sent a letter with the decision about your child’s school. If your child is refused a place, you can appeal against the decision. The letter will tell you how.

You must appeal against each rejection separately. You can only appeal once against each rejection.

If your child does not have a school place, you can contact your local council to find places in your area.

Preparing your appeal
The admission authority for the school must allow you at least 20 school days to appeal from when they send the decision letter.

The admission authority will set a deadline for submitting information and evidence to support your appeal. If you submit anything after the deadline, it might not be considered and may result in delays to your hearing.

Coram Children’s Legal Centre may be able to give you advice about appeals.

When the hearing will be
The admission authority must give you at least 10 school days’ notice of the hearing.

Appeals must be heard within 40 school days of the deadline for making an appeal.

What happens at the appeal hearing
There’s a panel of 3 or more people at the appeal hearing. The panel must be independent and must follow the school admission appeals code.

The admission authority will explain why they turned down your application.

You’ll be able to give your own reasons why your child should be admitted.

The appeals panel must decide if the school’s admission criteria were properly followed and comply with the school admissions code.

If the criteria were not properly followed or do not comply with the school admissions code your appeal must be upheld.

If your reasons for your child to be admitted outweigh the school’s reasons for not admitting any more children at all, your appeal will be upheld.

You will usually be sent the decision within 5 school days.

Appeals for infant classes
You need to go through the same process if you’re appealing a decision about an infant class. In reception, year 1 and year 2, the class size is limited to 30. Your application can be turned down if all the classes already have 30 children.

Your appeal could be successful if:

giving your child a place will not increase the class size above the limit
the admission arrangements have not been properly followed
the admission criteria do not comply with the school admissions code

Complain about the appeals process
You can complain about the way the appeal was carried out, but you can not complain about the decision itself.

Maintained schools
Complain to the Local Government Ombudsman.

Fill in the online complaint form.

Other schools
Complain to the Education and Skills Funding Agency (ESFA) about an appeal made to:

free schools
academies
university technical colleges
studio schools
Fill in the online complaint form – sign up for an account if you want to save your form.

Contact ESFA if you need a paper form instead.

You should get a decision on your complaint within 9 weeks (45 working days). You’ll be told if it’ll take longer.

You’ll get a letter explaining the reasons for the decision.

If ESFA decides something went wrong with the appeals panel, it may:

ask the school to hold a new appeal hearing with a different panel
recommend the school reviews its appeals process
If a maintained school becomes an academy
If you complain about an admission appeal hearing held by a maintained school that then converts to academy status, this complaint will be investigated by the Local Government Ombudsman.

The Ombudsman will pass any actions to ESFA.

Find your local council
Find the website for your local council.

Postcode lookup
Enter a postcode
For example SW1A 2AA

  Find
Find a postcode on Royal Mail's postcode finder
